this UCSD TV program is presented by
University of California television like
what you learn visit our website or
follow us on Facebook and Twitter to
keep up with the latest programs
[Music]
good evening um I just occurred to me I
don't know whether Dr Muki Minds that
we're plan our plan is to overthrow the
Emperor of all maladies which is his
book but starting from that point um as
those of you who know who have attended
earlier programs in this series the
Ethics Center is dedicated to creating
Community dialogue about the ethical
challenges that arise in the development
of cuttingedge Science and Implement and
implementation of new
technologies to do so we convene
programs in which the public can hear
about exciting new developments and the
scientists and members of the community
can together identify those challenges
that might impede scientific development
and propose
Solutions this year is the third in
which the Ethics Center has developed a
group of programs with a focus on a
single book this evening is the fourth
in this year's series inspired by s
Arthur M's book emperor of all maladies
those of you who have read his book know
how easy it was to make it the focus for
our program this year Mukerji addresses
a topic of supreme interest to all of us
it is undoubtedly U among the most
comprehensive reviews of what we know
about cancer and it is incredibly well
written I now pleased to introduce Dr
Dean Nelson founder and director of the
journalism program program at Point lman
azarine University he has written widely
for numerous National Publications but
is particularly welln for his interviews
of book authors for the annual writer
Symposium by the Sea please join me in
welcoming drors Nelson and
muker thank you thank
[Music]
you he introduced us as doctors but as
my kids say I'm not a real doctor you
you I think I'm also pretending yeah
you're pretending Dr Muki let me start
this way after reading your book emperor
of all
maladies I have a brand new
appreciation and respect for cancer I I
also have a sense of
inevitability about it it feels like
after reading your book it's here it's
always going to be here um there's this
line in there that in your book the
cancer cell seeks
immortality is that an accurate
assessment that we're it's just
here well so it depends on what as as
Clinton would say it depends on what
your meaning of here is
here uh well it just feels like
cockroaches right you know the the whole
world could end and we're still going to
have cancer and
cockroaches and Coca-Cola
uh to complete the alliteration yeah
thank you very much coola but uh but no
but but but but perhaps more uh more
importantly the there is little doubt
that it was always here cancer was
always here in its various
forms um in ancient history um and it
there's to me very little doubt that
it's part of our future um it is our it
is part of our genetic future there is
there is no doubt about that uh and it
comes from a very simple idea I also
think it's a very profound idea which is
that the very genes
that make us successful as multicellular
organisms if you mutate those genes in
in certain sequences certain ways you
unleash u a a highly successful cell and
one of the phenotypes of a highly
successful Survivor cell is cancer so uh
it is it is it is not a coincidence but
the very genes that allow our embryos to
grow our hands to grow our feet to grow
if you mutate them in inappro contexts
will ultimately release the disease that
kills us well well let's take that a
step further and and just talk about the
survivability of a species to evolve and
adapt to uh to its circumstances that's
sort of the upside of evolution right
but you're saying um the there this is
the flip side this if if you're going to
have mutations that allow
adaptability this is the price we pay
this is and I think that you know again
these it's so this is this is hard to
prove experimentally although people
have tried to do this experimentally to
ask the question if you suppress
mutability um in primordial organisms do
you get an organism that's more fit or
less fit the answer is quite clear
usually you get organisms that are less
fit so mutability change um is is one of
the things that is that is that is
profound inheritance that we have From
Evolution um but we have a we pay a
price for that we pay a price for for
the survivability of our cells we pay a
pice price for aging we pay a price for
uh our capacity to uh create organs we
pay a price for our capacity to have
stem cells um that same capacity that
gives us the cap the ability to have
stem cells which are cells that have
incredible expansile potential uh and
and behave in ways that can quickly
adapt to uh very different circumstances
by divid biing rapidly and populating uh
tissue or Contracting and going to sleep
when circumstances demand um if you now
take that very same property and you
mutate those very same genes you get a
cell that can divide inappropriately
when it uh when circumstances come and
and then uh go into dorcy uh maybe when
you give it uh toxic therapies which is
of course the fundamental phenotype of
cancer so I think that it is it is a it
is a it is a scientific idea it is a
biological idea it is a physiological
idea and ultimately I would argue it's a
philosophical idea that that the that
the that the consequences of the success
of cellular Revolution are are are um
have have have left us with
vulnerabilities um and and uh we did not
get a free
lunch and
yet we hear all sorts of researchers and
news reports saying the end of cancer is
near we're in fact we've heard people
say it's we're going to end cancer in
our lifetime um are are those folks just
crazy or what is that I think some of
them are crazy uh um and I used to say
this with uh more uh reservation I think
I say it less with less reservation now
um I go back to a to something that I
that I saw which was on Richard Do's um
uh office which I thought was wonderful
which is to say death in old age is
inevitable uh the job of science is to
prevent death uh unanticipated deaths in
unanticipated times uh and that is a I I
find that that that is a perfectly
reasonable goal said that one more time
death in old age is inevitable yeah uh
our goal is to prevent and the words are
important um the original words were
this is not Do's formulation but the
original words were unanticipated deaths
and unanticipated times uh which is to
say that some people who are old and
very healthy uh for them death can be
unanticipated as well
so you know the the job I think um I
think the job is to create a kind of
reconciliation and we're far from there
yet so if you're saying to me that we
will have a more profound more proximal
reconciliation with cancer in the next
few decades I think the answer is
absolutely yes I think you know I I'm
I'm I'm I'm as much as sober Optimist as
anyone else um but on the other hand I
think that if you're going to say to me
we're going to turn around the the
entire spectrum of complex cancers
within the next five years I think
that's a little crazy all right so you
came to this country at age 19 correct
from New
Delhi you went to Stanford your road
scholar you get a PhD at Oxford and you
get a degree from Harvard Medical School
then you write a book you're first it
wins the pullit a prize you see where
I'm going uh you're doing a movie with
Ken
Burns don't you don't you think this is
a little unfair to the rest of
us aren't you just a little bit ashamed
of
yourself what am I supposed to say
all right all right we'll just skip over
that part so I'm I'm struck I'm I'm also
struck by the way you wrote this book
The Emperor of all melodies it you wrote
this in According to some accounts 10
and 20 minute
bursts seriously so and it's that
serious um I um in a creatively speaking
I'm incredibly indisciplined I I I I I
can tell you a couple of things that I
figured out about my own life
when I was when I was learning to write
and when I was learning to do
experiments I am such a lousy
experimentalist that I told myself if I
can get things to work they've got to be
right you know if if they if they work
in my hands then they've got to be
they've got to work in real life because
you know because because I I can barely
you know distin discriminate between
between one tube and another tube for
Christ's sake so anyway so so by similar
logic I I thought to myself if I can
explain things in a way that passes must
to my own sense of judgment in this book
then I I I will trust that and I will
allow myself to have the Liberty to play
with narrative structure we talked a
little bit about this
before in a way that does service to the
book uh to the to the to the bigger
questions in the book um and
so some of the consequences of that were
uh I will respect my process of writing
my process of writing is extremely
linear I begin with the first word I'm
I'm you know I've written more I've
written I'm in the middle of another
book I begin with the first word and
essentially end with the last word
that's not totally true obviously I
delete I move I I move but what I don't
do what I cannot do is I can't write in
you know people would say oh you know
stop that chapter there and just move on
and write in the middle and you'll come
back to it I can't do that that that was
my process so so that was one piece of
the process and the second piece of the
process was I thought I thought that as
a writer I would liberate myself from
from from the standard stick of writing
which is you know you have a desk you I
couldn't produce a single word um
sitting at a desk so instead I decided
that I was going to write in bed um so I
wrote this I wrote All of emperor in bed
um essentially I kept piling books up uh
further and further all around me um and
I would started now I would start sort
of in the evening and I would work very
well actually also early in the morning
so then later when I I uh when the when
the when the book was done um I was
feeling oh my God now I'm a real writer
I should go and make do writerly things
like I should buy myself a desk and uh I
don't know I don't know what Writers Do
they have like rooms to write in or
something so I got all of these autant
and I couldn't produce a single word I
was sitting in my office not producing a
single word and then I had the genius
inspiration I said why don't I put a bed
into my
office I love it and I did so right in
the middle I'm in I'm mean I'm I'm
sitting there in my medical office and
in the my medical office is a fold out
cart yeah and I go inside I sit on my
foldout cart and I write and now I'm
writing again because you know that was
one You' got a place for it I've got a
place for it exactly so I have I have
like all people I have you know I have
idiosyncrasies I have eccentricities and
my general philosophy is if if it works
don't don't try to break it sure you
know one of the other things about your
book uh besides my respect for cancer
was the fervor that doctors had in
trying to uh treat patients but it was
pretty brutal some of the things that
that happened there were pretty brutal
cancer Wards had to be equipped certain
ways so that the patients wouldn't kill
themselves right because of some of the
uh the
treatments so there's obviously an
ethical component here of um of doctors
experimenting on patients
are we still doing that well let me take
a step back um and and sort of ground uh
ground one important feature of this
convers I spoke a little bit about this
before I want to want to carry this
theme a little bit forward which is
I'm
interested um and I described this just
just a few few minutes ago to you uh I'm
interested in the structure of knowledge
um and cancer is a lens probably I would
argue that one of the most important
lenses that allows us to investigate the
structure of the acquisition of
knowledge in the 20th and 21st century
now what do I mean by that I mean by
that and I gave this analogy before if
you look at if you look at the 14th or
15th century or if you look look even
earlier the plague um becomes not just a
prism by which you can view and imagine
Society it becomes probably the prism by
which you can view and imagine Societies
in other words you cannot describe the
structure of parts of medieval Society
without taking into account
the devastation but psychological
Devastation the the medical Devastation
Etc that that was caused by the plague
well the the the percentage of the human
race that was just wiped out by that
right um similarly I mean and and and we
were just talking about that it is very
difficult to have to encounter the
history of the mid 1980s or early 1980s
and late 1970s in the United States
without taking into account without
seeing with with a clarifying prism HIV
and AIDS um you cannot you cannot do it
it would be a
misapprehension um I would argue that
it's becoming progressively a
misapprehension to try to understand the
structure of knowledge structure of
societies without looking at cancer
cancer provides us with and and which is
why I
think you know I didn't initiate this
interdisciplinary interde departmental
conversation that happened here around
cancer but I instantly understood why it
could be that the the it was so obvious
to me that this this this could be an
interdisciplinary conversation because
of the variety of issues that it raises
so much so and and you know just just to
just to reiterate this point which is to
say that
um Society is viewing cancer in a mirror
and Mir and cancer is viewing Society in
an identical parallel mirror they are
two parallel mirrors that are reflecting
each other and the images are receding
out into infinity and you
cannot you cannot get I think a hold of
contemp you cannot get the complete hold
of Contemporary American culture
contemporary culture in the west without
contending with the fact that cancer has
put a pet on this um has changed the way
we think about mortality has changed the
way we think about struggles against
mortality it's changed the way we think
about what we can do what is achievable
what's not achievable the nature of our
hubris the nature of human arrogance the
nature of our successes the nature of
Ingenuity the
uh it all falls out in that story is
every story um so now we're back to
though doctors experimenting goes back
to the idea of doctors experiment with
experiment with their patients so you
can you can write a and and you know if
you look at if you look at Sydney
farber's first experiments with um with
patients uh you can certainly write a a
an enormous tone on on on the nature of
that experimentation what was good and
bad about it it
it's it was very clear if you speak to
the if you speak to the researchers from
the 1950s and 1960s they will clearly
tell you that the Ambiance that we have
created of patient safety in 2014 they
will unabashedly tell you is harming
cancer research they will tell you that
that that that we have become too
conservative in cancer research and you
say really I mean is that could that
possibly be true that we've become to
too too timid too diffident in cancer
research that we we've lost some of the
spirit but the but many of them I I can
tell you I did the I made I did these
interviews are convinced that that's the
case so that leads to a question I mean
this is a national qu this should lead
to a conversation immediately that you
know are we being too diffident you know
is it true have we invented ourselves a
network of of of of of important guides
important stop gaps in safety that is
now harming ourselves now who's going to
have that conversation without you
without you know all of us being
involved this is a conversation which
involves all of us I which where are you
going what line are you going to draw
now you have to realize doctors can't
draw that line patients can patients I
would say patients are the only people
who can really and by saying patients
can I really mean everyone can because
all of us are patients so we can as
patients as as people on whom illness is
visited and people who struggle against
illness people who defend ourselves in
our struggle against illnesses people
who defend the people who try to to
define the Borderlands of what is
normaly and illness so this is a job
that doctors actually do quite poorly
this is not a doctor's job well okay but
what what is the patient job here okay
so I've I've been treated for
cancer should I be offering
myself as a subject for
for my doctor to say well let's try this
well let's try that I mean do I have an
obligation there no you have no
obligation to move knowledge forward um
so it depends on so I I would say yes
you have an obligation to move knowledge
forward but the way you have the
obligation to move knowledge forward is
to participate um vociferously
vehemently in a conversation if this was
your issue if you were interested in
this issue is to participate
vociferously vly pushing the boundaries
of this conversation asking the question
that we have sort of become inept at
asking or many questions that we become
inept at asking are we are we too
divident today uh should we be advancing
the the treatment of cancer in
particular ways that we're ignoring
right now how should we fund this effort
who's going to pay the money for it um
that sort of question that doctors can
answer they're terrible at asking that
question they you know this is this is
not their job um so who should you
should uh you know you should your
you're a journalist you should you
should uh you know you're you're you're
you're a father who's lost their child
to leukemia you should you know you're a
woman with breast cancer um and you know
guess what when when when that when when
when the when the chips were laid down
the the bravest Among Us did um when the
chips were laid down the bravest Among
Us uh were were you know were
participating in act up trying to say
look doctors can't figure out whether or
not to move move AIDS drugs into trial
we will act up um when the when when
when the chips were down the bravest
women with breast cancer were outside
Genex saying let's expedite the trials
um you know I feel that I feel there's I
feel that we are becoming
anemic uh our public conversation out
cancer is becoming anemic it's becoming
it's become too technical um it's become
technical we're told about advancements
about cancer you know about microscopic
advancements that can change one thing
or the other thing but there's a ground
swell conversation which is to me that's
missing which is where are we going why
are we going there um who guides us who
should we lean to as guides who operates
this machine uh is there is there a
central is is there a central goal here
who funds that Central goal are we
funding it enough uh who governs whether
who governs that fine line between the
autonomy of patients and the autonomy of
and and and science so so so let's have
it out let's have it out and unless we
have it out this this this Welter will
not wel don't we depend on the National
Institute for health to do this or the
FDA or insurance companies or Columbia
University researchers or is that's
we're kind of counting on those or
entities aren't we the National
Institute of Health is a is the National
Institute of Health depends on you uh
and and in in a in a perfectly symbiotic
synergistic relationship you depend on
the National Institute of Health um and
then the minute you begin to forget this
this this symbiosis the minute either of
this conversation becomes one
directional that you think that you that
that that this that this this very close
relationship gets gets uh broken down I
think you I think I think the community
around illness cancer cancer being one
of them begins to suffer the
conversation around illness begins to
suffer
all right let's let's shift over to um
genetic profiling let's genetic
profiling okay let's talk about that for
a minute we know how to better treat an
individual's cancer now right because it
because we've come to the conclusion
thanks to people like you that um this
person's cancer is not the same as that
person's cancer breast cancer is not
breast cancer uh so we We've Come to an
individualized kind of treatment is that
correct that is correct and that's the
direction that many cancers have been
moving yes and so is everybody on board
with this is the FDA on board with this
are insurance companies on board with
this because this looks fairly specific
which strikes me as expensive it's not
clear that I'm on board with it um why
because of several reasons so you
know it is very important
for the world it's I think it's very
important for researchers to be highly
skeptical of the most fashionable ideas
in research at any point of time this is
our job this is this is you were asking
me what the job of of a physician or or
a scientist is the job of physician or a
sci this is what we do quite well if we
do do it well which is to be to be to be
you know instead of saying to to dine
own sense self be true it is to say to
thine own self be false um which is to
constantly be skeptical of the the
prevailing fads in cancer research there
is little doubt I think that the cancer
genome is showing us one very clear
signal which is to say that there is
immense profound diversity in cancers so
one leukemia differs from another
leukemia in very critical ways what's
also showing us are two things number
one is that there are deep commonalities
sometimes between leukemias maybe the
pathways may be slightly different maybe
the mutations are different but there
are some commonalities and the one
question is in fact are we appropriately
in in that right moment between figuring
out the common pieces and and the
diverse
pieces the second thing that it's
showing us through the again through
through the fundamentals of genomics is
that two cancers that maybe look very
different from each other under a
microscope a gastrointestinal stromal
tumor and a leukemia of some sort in
fact resemble each other so at the same
time that there is this this the field
is bursting as it were with diversity
there is an attempt to unify things I'll
give you one very good example that we
were just talking about it immunological
therapies for cancer uh which are
actually highly successful um if you
said to me that oh you know every Cancer
is so diverse that we will never be able
to use immunological therapies against
leukemias I I might say well maybe
that's right but in fact they work uh
the immune system for some cancers
doesn't seem to care what particular
mutations you have they actually
recognize the cancers so this is a long
winded way of saying is that that that
one must constantly create and this is
what what scientists can do if they're
if they're really being thoughtful about
it one must constantly create a theory
and its opposition a fad and the anti-ad
and evaluate them at the same time so
that we don't get trapped because you
know because science is a story it wants
you to believe a story it wants you to
convince you of a story that's what it
it's very powerful it is one of the most
powerful Stories We Tell ourselves but
just like a reader of a story remains
skeptical of the story itself a great
reader of story remains skeptical of
story of Storytelling a scientist remain
skeptical of the story of science um I
think that's what's that's what's very
powerful about science so fads will come
and go uh they will create advancement
um but we have to remember that you know
look for diversity when there's Unity
look for Unity when there's diversity I
think there's a kind of back and forth
in this which is very important not to
get stuck in a particular way of
thinking so every time there's some new
discovery or some new report or or
whatever you rather than
say isn't that great that's just awesome
you're you're saying let's let's not get
too excited about this no no no I'm
super excited about new discoveries you
know I I try to make discoveries in on
myself I'm I'm a I'm a I'm a you know
when I when I I'm extremely excited
about discoveries and I think that I
think that I you know I'm the opposite
of of of someone who's pessimistic about
the future um however I do think that
discoveries happen in a space I think
those in other words what I'm trying to
say is that the it is precisely the
culture of skepticism that allows great
discoveries to happen that if you lose
one you lose the other um great
discoveries are exciting because they
arise out of cultures that are skeptical
of their greatness sure all right so I
say that right yeah yeah I'm I'm sure
somebody here tracked with that yeah did
anyone understand no no we all we all
got it um all right so let let's talk
about what you tell patients I mean
there are some really really profound
things in your book about what what
you're willing to say to a patient about
how much hope to have or or here's
here's kind of the straight uh the
straight information and and yet in
Sunday's New York Times there's an oped
uh in there about how doctors lie to
their patients I read it is right so so
how
much let let's say because of the
genetic profiling that that you've done
on a particular person you can see even
some probabilities of what this person
is likely to encounter down the line do
you feel like you've got an obligation
to to tell the patient all of that or or
should you like the oped piece should
you just lie to
him um well the the the problem with
lying and telling truth is that we think
about we think that this is a process
that happens in a single unit of time um
but in fact good medicine is practiced
longitudinally
um it has to be so uh so if you speak to
people who really understand this
and you you know know better than people
who practice really practice paliative
care they will tell you that it's a
longitudinal process that that and and I
actually wrote I wrote a piece about
this which was titled hope is negotiable
right in fact you you were quoting drum
grman when when when you say hope is a
vital organ yes which just really struck
me as profound yes so so uh so Jerry
believes that hope is a vital Oran I
agree with him uh I also believe it's
negotiable and by negotiable I mean that
that that hope on day one of
chemotherapy for a patient is not the
same as Hope on day 31 of chemotherapy
for that same patient when he or she
might be relapsing uh they are different
things those two the organ has changed
um and just like you wouldn't operate uh
it's a dynamic organ um it's it's part
of the way we intercept the world and
you have to be with them uh through the
process um and good doctors are they
they have the capacity to negotiate they
have the capacity to understand uh uh
you know what what happens next um I had
had an interesting conversation actually
sort of relevant um I just finished I do
uh some very intensive time in the war
uh three times a year um and the there
was a there was a medical resident who
uh was presenting a case and they we get
up every morning there's a cases are
presented and the um the the resident
was presenting a case in the following
manner uh with all good intentions uh
was saying you know would name the
patient um Mrs Grace Jones uh give you
an age say 61 years old say she has
metastatic breast cancer and then would
say
DNR
dni uh saying that she has said that she
doesn't DNR means do not resuscitate and
dni means do not intubate which means uh
don't take Extreme Measures uh if some
adverse event was to happen and then
would go on to the next M Mr M Mr Morris
Smith 64 prostate cancer DNR dni it was
like a Vital sign it was like they were
reciting a Vital sign for every patient
so I stopped the the resident mid I said
why are you telling me for every patient
why are you telling me DNR dni and they
say well you know that's because that's
the official way that we communicate
with each other telling you whether
patients should be have heroic
interventions or non-h heroic
interventions and I said well wait a
second the purpose of that code is to
clarify a goal right so if the code code
stands for a goal so unless you tell me
what the goal is you can't tell me what
the code is so I need to find out what
the goal of this patient is is the goal
of this woman to live because she wants
to live to see her son graduate right
now DNR DNA doesn't capture that so if
you want to commun you know you I mean
let's let's be pragmatic with a very
busy time in the hospital um so you
don't I need I don't need that
information for every patient but if
you're trying to communicate to me what
the goal of the patient is then it
behooves you to go and find out what is
the goal of the patient patient is and
and tell me is that goal mismatched is
that goal real is it completely out of
whack that's the information I need now
so what was amazing about this is that
it's as you know this was this this is
during teaching rounds all of a sudden
it's like as a bulbs went off in
everyone's heads they were saying wait a
second so that's what the real purpose
of all of this is that that that that we
encode
information but the code is a mechanism
to get to the real information the real
information is goal so I mean and and
you can you can you can you can extend
this out into any part of medicine right
sure well I'm thinking about what if the
goal is I I don't want to be treated at
such a level that I'm going to lose my
eyesight or I'm going to I'm going to
you know some of the other uh treatments
where they carve out you know a whole
section of a person's chest or something
like that and somebody saying I don't
that isn't my that isn't where I want to
go so is that a goal that is very much a
goal and you you know and and it depends
and this is this is why this this is why
it's important to be cognizant of the
limits and the and the and the Precision
of medicine which is to find out well
what does that mean to you
uh why what are your fear what are the
fears here the fear is that you're going
to lose your hair the fear is you're
going to lose your eyesight the fear is
you're going to lose your um function
autonomy um so I think one of the goals
in cancer medicine is to get to those
fears um okay and it's very important to
get to the fears because otherwise
you're just going to practice in a
vacuum okay so addressing those fears
and and trying to be cognizant of Hope
and knowing about goals does that
Collide ever with just pure
ethics it it it doesn't Collide it lives
in the domain of Ethics it is part of
the fundamental domain of Ethics which
is to say you know the the
reconciliation of of goals to reality is
one of the fundamental goals of of
medical ethics I mean you know how how
do you reconcile these it's a fun it's
one of the fundamentals of paliative
care and oncologists have to learn and
have learned how to practice paliative
care it's one of the it's one of the it
should be and it has been one of the
fundamental requirements of all medical
professional oncology aside if you if
you want to do
medicine you know you have to begin to
First understand what is what does it
mean to to practice paliative care what
what does pation mean it means to re it
is a process of reconciliation and how
do you reconcile people have different
ways to reconcile but it it is
fundamentally process of
reconciliation all right so so let's
talk about another dark side that comes
out of uh that comes out of your book
where I can talk about lots of dark
sides there are so many dark sides where
where you show the Dark Side of cancer
research's history a little fraud a
little corruption little egomania a
little arrogance research groups that
won't talk to each other seemed like you
were describing the Department of
Homeland Security or or or the NSA you
know where where you've got you've
got this worship I think this was your
phrase this worship of hierarchy and
Orthodoxy and
tradition why couldn't they get along
why why speaking of goals why couldn't
they just say here's our goal well let
us also say that this is also a story of
resilience Ingenuity uh uh uh
performance outside the Call of Duty uh
courage Beyond capacity of human
imagination of imagination of of of
researchers who went out of their way
patients who went Advocates who went out
of their way so so it's both yes and
this is not a dark to me it's not a dark
story but if you want to explore the
dark sides to the story um absolutely
but I I said before I'm interested in
the structure of knowledge I'm
interested in the nature by which
knowledge is acquired and it is acquired
through mechanisms that are as you would
put it light and dark uh the the
archology of human knowledge shows us
the history of human knowledge shows us
that you know knowledge is not acquired
in in ways that are uh that are sort of
uh uh uh Pleasant through and through U
that that there that that built into the
very mechanisms of Desire um are
mechanisms that that
create all this dark matter uh you know
is it any different now have things
improved on those kind of communication
lines or are there the same kind of
sniping that's going on I think I mean I
think I think the the the the
fundamental structures will remain the
same they are Amplified their uh you
know we invent institutions to in in in
in good times we invent institutions to
ameliorate against uh these flaws in bad
times we invent institutions that
amplify these flaws um and one of the
jobs one of our jobs is to figure out is
the in is an institution being invented
to is is it is it servicing human flaws
or is it is it actually ameliorating
them and and and you will often find
that there are institutions that do a
disservice uh uh so so I think I think
you know uh I think I think there
there's the there there's this this
quality I mean so so it's it's very
important I think I mean just like in
narrative structure it's very important
to discriminate between content and form
um so the content of what's happening in
cancer medicine is changing all the time
um the content of what is happening in
in our interception with any new illness
is changing all the time but I suspect
its form is not changing and by that I
mean the form is driven by by very
ancient primordial human impulses and
those impulses can be very benign and
they they have a dark dark side to them
I suspect that in
2743 we can have the same conversation
because I think that in 2743 we will
have a we will have a conversation which
I'll say the content is totally changed
but the form seems to resemble the form
by which we arrived that this incredible
piece of knowledge seemed to resemble
the Mahabharata or some you know Indian
epic that was written in you know some
some very very prior Century at that
point of time okay so so this brings me
to get kind of the focus on on on the
content are we are we spending enough
giving enough attention to prevention or
too much to
treatment uh is and and where where are
we on prevention so I think I think you
know prevention I think it would be fair
to say unless someone's going to throw a
knife at me from the audience I think
prevention research was was for a long
time stuck in a very difficult place
because of the nature of of of of the
study which is to say that um you know
in order to find I it's actually quite
if you think about it it becomes very
obvious in a second which is to say that
in order to if if you have a very rare
cancer that is caused by a very rare
event those things stand out like sore
thumbs like so give you one example
misoa that's caused by asbest exposure
the people who got really uh enormous
amounts of asbest exposure were Shipyard
workers for instance they had a high
incidence of misela the Confluence of
these two things is like an eclipse you
know you can you don't get these things
normally and it it becomes very clear
epidemiologically so that's fine now so
that's the most that's the clearest
category then there's an intermediate
category which is you have a um you have
a rare cancer but it's caused by a
common exposure um and there several
examples of that um those are a little
bit harder to find with were a little
bit harder to find with epidemiological
methods but they could still be found
the most ironically uh the most
difficult to find using classical
epidemiological methods were if you have
a common cancer that's incited by a
common carcinogen so imagine that
there's something that raises your risk
of breast cancer by 2% um breast cancer
is common that 2% difference is small
but it's impact on human populations is
enormous because the incidence of breast
cancer is enormous so in fact the
difference of 2% in breast cancer can be
can have a huge impact on human lives 5%
10% those were the hardest to find
because classical epidemiological
methods and I can talk about them in the
book are actually not geared to find
those the change is that those methods
have started to change and they've
become enormously empowered by molecular
biology by the by by a a fleet of new
biological uh techniques which allow you
to now begin to C capture that behavior
that 10% 15% behavior and now the
challenge is converting that into uh
into prevention so sifting through
signal and noise to use uh relatively uh
conventional ways of thinking about it
sifting through signal and noise and
saying where is signal where is noise to
try to figure out what's really you know
what is is there are is there a link
between certain exogenous estrogens and
breast cancer right I'm saying this
because remember remember how difficult
it was to figure out that that there was
a link between women taking exogenous
estrogen for uh menopausal therapy and
breast cancer so here is a captive
population of women who have either been
given or not given a drug which raises
estrogenic levels which is a known uh
co-actor in breast cancer and we're
asking the question was there an
increase or not increase and it took a
10e study to prove that using classical
methods the hope is that you can get to
much much more thoughtful fine-tuned
mechanisms to address these kinds of
questions with Biology this has been
called opening the black box of
epidemiology imagine you know
carcinogens went in something happened
cancer came out what happened in this
black box could you open up this black
box and start to look at the mechanisms
and thereby try to be much more
proactive about about prevention so I
think and that's been that's a that's
been a rich area I think in in in cancer
research is something like the CVS
drugstore chain saying they're not going
to sell tobacco products anymore is that
going to have any impact on
prevention I think it'll have some
impact on prevention I'm not sure it'll
have a g gigantic impact on prevention
um seemed like a token well I I don't
want to presume motives here but I don't
know what what can be done to by just
the rest of us not the researchers but
by the rest of us so there was there's a
very interesting study which was done
which which um which actually rose out
of another very interesting study so
this is um I'll tell you the first study
because it's interesting and then I'll
go on to the second and third study
which was done by a group of uh
scientists in which which was called
Loosely has been colloquially called
that the happiness bubble or the
Happiness Project it's a very
interesting study so what they asked
they asked the following question which
is that they went to um let's say a
village um it was actually a small town
and they mapped every social network in
that town um so you know if your Uncle
George is is mapped to you because he's
your uncle you the guy you play golf
with is mapped to you because through
your golfing exchange etc etc they went
to a town and they mapped every social
network um whether you likeed someone or
disliked someone doesn't matter you
still get mapped to them U nonetheless
so you create you create a web as it
work and then they ask the question they
dynamically ask the question how does
this network behave in terms of
Happiness over time so if you are happy
um is your neighbor happy your social
neighbor and if your neighbor is unhappy
are you unhappy and so forth so you
could get some correlational you could
actually dynamically map this
correlation I'll make it relevant in a
second I'm trusting you here that that
we're going somewhere yes right so very
interesting thing was was found with
this which is to say that this social
interactome U to use a fancy word was
actually quite predictive of happiness
in other words the interaction network
was highly predictive there were nodes
of happy people um and there were nodes
of unhappy people and these nodes moved
together in space and time so over time
these nodes flickered on flickered off
as if they behaved almost
organism this study was then repeated
with obesity
um and similarly there were nodes now
again it's much becomes harder because
now there's genetics that begins to
enter we know this powerful role of
genetics but in fact there are nodes
which flicker on and off so there are
nodes that cluster uh within a town of
of certain behaviors and then it was
repeated with smoking so the question
that was asked was could you if you
mapped smoking Behavior across a 10year
period onto this social network could
you make sense of this and it's very
interesting study because what happens
is is that when someone flickers off on
this node predictively that entire nodes
flickers off so and by by that I mean
that if you stop smoking your neighbor
who plays golf with you actually stops
smoking with you uh and so does your
Uncle George and if you continue to
smoke you actually cluster yourself with
other smokers so this network begins to
move now what does this say this says
something very important which is to say
that smoking therefore is as much a
disease that lives in a social
interactome as it lives in a in
addictive behaviors as it might live in
genetic propensities as it might live in
in in a in a in a cultural realm and
that is to say that if you really wanted
to get to the bottom of tobacco if you
really want to affect Behavior change
what you might want to do is you might
want to change it at this interaction
level could you could that be a Target
so just like we imagine Targets in in
the human genome could you imagine
Targets in the human social interacton
what would those targets be would you
have to create counter networks that
would that would seed them that would
stop the stop particular kinds of
behavior once again why am I talking
about this I'm talking about this
because yet again just that small
Behavior studying that small Behavior
not small Behavior studying that
behavior deeply illustrates the
structure of human beings our psychology
our networks and our knowledge um so
again you know you know this is what's
amazing about illness is that it is it
is a it is it is I would argue the most
profound lens that we have to understand
Wellness it is the most
profound the the the the pathology is
the most profound way we can understand
physiology abnormaly is the most
profound way we can understand normaly
sure so what are the things that are
keeping us now whether in our social
structures or in our political
structures or scientifically what are
the things that are keeping us from um
going to the next level of efficiency or
Effectiveness regarding diagnosis
treatment prevention any of that what's
holding us back so so I don't think
there's one answer I think there are
many things that are holding us back um
I I certainly think that that one kind
of answer and I was talking about this a
little bit earlier is that again I I
sense this is a kind of a loose sense I
I it's hard to say I sense we're sort of
giving up um really I I think we're I I
sense that I sense that we've lost the
kind of energy that existed in the 1970s
and
1980s um and I I I worry about it um I
worry about the fact that we the on one
hand we we're inundated with information
there's information coming at us from
everywhere but on the other hand it it
seems to me that that the energy that
drove the changes um that created
uh Mary lasers out of us
um I sense it weakening we we don't have
any Champions we have fewer Champions we
have we have less uh
urgency um we have
less we are more I would say we're more
distracted uh we've lost sight of
our important questions I'll tell you
I'll tell you why I give you an example
I was asked to speak at at MIT at at a
at a
function and um this is an example of
distraction and and it was it was a very
very very very thoughtful conference and
it was the I think the it was the
Provost who organized it or um uh and
and he said you know what's wonderful
thing about these new undergraduates
that are coming to MIT is that they
don't choose Majors they choose
questions um which is a lovely thing to
say which is to say that they go into a
this true for I'm sure this is true for
San Diego they come in here and they're
choosing questions they want to say my
question is whatever it might be and I'm
going to
use classrooms or education as tools to
try to solve that question this is a
wonderful thing but here's my only
problem with it who's telling whom what
questions to ask
so is it an equivalent question to say
I'm going to build a better social
network versus saying I'm going to
change the way we think about cancer
um to
me there are in the world of questions
there's a hierarchy of questions and I I
feel that we're getting distracted I
think that there's too much noise and
we've lost sight of and I hate I me
there's no other way to put it we've
lost sight of the essentials the
essentials are
there are deadly diseases um that
contort human physiology uh we have be
we began to get a glimpse of what it
would mean what it would take to solve
many of these deadly diseases
um we made critical advances in trying
to figure out their physiology and at
the moment when it was all set up we
began to lose steam um and that worries
me I hope we don't I hope well that's
that's partly a political ISS
is you know funding coming from uh from
a a group uh in politics who would say
this is important to us but you're
saying it's not that important to those
decision makers I think it's not I think
I think you would be surprised
um it it becomes immediately important
to those decision makers when their
first loved one has cancer mhm all of a
sudden it transforms from someone else's
problem to their problem but you can't I
mean statistically can't it's not
someone else's problem it's your problem
it has to be you know it it's going to
be there's no there's no if you can't
you know you can't have an argument
about this but but that's that's that's
that's the that's the that is the that
that is the
U that is that is the dissipating force
that I that I'm I I feel concerned about
that's the purpose of the film by the
way is to remind us that it's not
someone else's problem yeah what are
there some practices that are going on
right now in cancer treatment that you
think we're going to look back in 10 or
50 years or something like that and say
what were you guys thinking I think
there'll be many I think that there are
many practices like that and I think you
want you want to take some
guesses I'm going to offend so many
people by the end of this conversation
that you'll have no friends left no
that's what's nice about it you know if
you offend people it's a great equalizer
if you offend everyone equally then you
gain back all your friends from the
beginning
true well so I mean you know we we saw
some of them so we've seen some of them
so so for instance we we now know after
decades and Decades of studying that um
that we need new methods of screening
for breast cancer we found that out last
week um that you know that that the old
methods of screening for breast cancer
aren't very successful we knew that 10
years ago we knew that 20 years ago but
20 years later we figured out this is
now really really really true that that
those methods are ineffective and
therefore we need to go and to find uh
different methods of screen for breast
cancer similar for prostate cancer and
we I was just going to say that we we
now know it's really really really true
that if you screen indiscriminately for
prostate cancer that is going to be a
problem
now I I I guarantee you that there's
technology that exists today uh you
would not need to reinvent new
technologies to figure out for for
scientist to figure out to discriminate
between the aggressive variant of
prostate cancer and the non-aggressive
there's actually studies that are
ongoing right now we need to bring those
studies to the clinic we need to make
tests out of them we need to make them
available to human beings we need to
make sure that people in UND people who
are particularly underserved for
instance in prostate cancer
African-American men uh particularly
underserved uh by medical treatment in
prostate cancer get the appropriate
tests get appropriately diagnosed when
they're and get appropriately treated so
that their lives can be can their can
their lives can be extended so there is
a there is a there is an enormous
project that lies ahead U some of which
techn technologically is becoming
solvable some of which remains
unsolvable uh there's you know there
there needs to be I would say a a a vast
marshalling of resources um to to solve
this problem it doesn't
exist where do where does it doesn't
exist because you and I are beginning to
give up that's the reason it doesn't
exist it doesn't exist because we are
losing a kind of
energy in the face of one of the
Monumental challenges of Our Generation
I don't think it's overstatement to say
cancer is one of the Monumental
challenges of our time so so let me let
me wrap this up this way I'm I'm really
struck by your sense of we've kind of
given up we and and so I'm now I'm
thinking so where does that leave the
developing world if if much of the
developing world is counting on coming
up with ways to treat things and uh and
diagnose things and prevent things and
if we're just kind of losing steam here
where does that leave everybody else my
point about talking about losing steam
here is to energize ourselves it is not
to say we're losing Steam and that's
what it should be it is it is really a a
what I'm trying to say is we have to my
point is to try to be vastly more
energetic when so is to say that if if
we're losing steam our job is to get
energy um we have to we have to bring in
from ourselves from our internal
resources the kind of resources that
we've used to solve problems before um
uh a Wellspring of of of pressure a
Wellspring of optimism a Wellspring of
of understanding the I mean you know
there is there can be little doubt that
the last 10 years last decade or so has
has exploded knowledge about cancer
cancer cell cancer genetics cancer
genomics cancer biology we the the the
the universities the academic centers
are exploding with knowledge the the the
the real question is how does that
knowledge get transformed into human
prevention human treatment um and and
that requires I think A Renewed Energy
we need to get that energy back I think
we will find it I think we will find it
and we will find it in in the United
States um I think we will transmit that
energy to other countries I think we
will Transit that transmit energy to our
children um and I think we in the end we
will begin to solve problems I think in
the end we will begin to solve this
series of monumental problems I have no
doubt about that um but I think it will
require it'll require more energy than
we have right now Dr mukar G thank you
so much for being with us thank you
[Music]